>> Sarah Drasner: MorphSVG,
this is one of my favorite parts.
Actually there was a question
way earlier in the day,
which was how to morphSVGs, so
now we're actually gonna talk about it.
I was like, just a minute!
Okay, cool, so
I used to live in San Francisco, and
there's a lot of hipsters
in San Francisco.
So I made this pen about my friends
called Interchangeable Hipsters,
just like changes the glasses and
the beards randomly.
That's all done with morphSVG,
just a silly, goofy fun.
So remember that, design everything first,
slowly unveil things,
we talked about way back in the beginning,
in this CSS Tricks pen?
So before, you knew how we did
this in terms of strategy and
strategery, strategizing.
Now, you can find out how we
actually made this with code.
So when we worked with that CSS Tricks,
a bunch of things morphed
from one thing to another.
There's also other little bits,
like this has some DRAW SVG.
When it went [SOUND].
That was some DRAW SVG little stuff,
but the rest of this is morphSVG.
So let's talk about morphSVG.
It's really easy to use.
You go morphSVG shape and actually
I think it still supports this, but
I think they've even changed it now so
it just says, morphSVG end,
if I remember correctly.
So you can use both, you can use either.
And you're really pointing
from one ID to the other.
I believe it does have to be an ID,
it can't be a class.
You're pointing from one thing to the
other, and the way that it works really
under the hood, I'm explaining this
part because otherwise, you'll run into,
if I don't explain how it works
you’ll run into problems.
Is that it’s going and grabbing the point
data the path point data in the DOM and
using that to change
the existing path points.
So that thing that element
that you're starting out with
does not become the other thing.
It looks like it's
becoming the other thing.
It's not really,
it's just using it's path points.
So if you need to target that
first one again, that start again,
after this, it's still that still same ID.
It didn't turn into this ID, got it?
The other part of that is that you
don't want to show this shape, right?
You want to hide that in the DOM, so
that it's in the DOM for it to go grab but
that it's not readily apparent for
people to see.
Otherwise, it will look
like it's still in the DOM.
You don't have to leave the shape
in the DOM if you don't want to.
You could just grab the path points and
dump them into this string if you want.
It's just a little less messy.
I don't know, it's up to you.
It's totally up to you.
Sometimes it's such a small amount
of path points you might as well.
The big deal here is that you can change
the amount of path points with SVG values.
But if they're not the same
amount of path points,
it gets really ugly really quickly.
So you could just grab the attribute D and
with JavaScript,
change it to another
attribute D path values.
But the morphs don't look very good.
GreenSock does a lot of
calculation under the hood
to make sure that that morph ends up being
really beautiful and kind of cohesive.
It only works on paths.
But they give you a method
to convert circles, rects,
ellipse, lines, all of these other shapes.
Two paths in order to
use it if you want to.
So if you want to work with a rect and
change it into some other shape, you’d
have to go morphSVGPlugin.ConvertToPath
change it to a path and
than you could use it for morphSVG.
One thing about that though,
if you do convert it to path,
you can't access it
then by calling circle.
I can't then go, grab the circles out
of the dump because they're no longer
circles, they're now paths.
You can also just grab it by
the ID that it actually is.
I usually do it this way,
because you don't want it
to run all those calculations
unless you really need it, right?
So another thing we can do is use
this thing called shapeIndex.
And shapeIndex is a thing
that they offer you so
that you can finely tune
your morphSVG animations.
It's a plugin that you'll load.
You're gonna load it into the DOM and play
with it and use it and find things out.
But then you're gonna remove it,
you're not gonna ship it to production.
You're just gonna use it
as kind of a utility.
So let me show you what it looks like.
So if we go into CodePen,
I'm gonna comment this out for a second.
I have to run it.
>> Sarah Drasner: So
that's what that looks like.
I've got a hex and I've got a star, and
I'm pointing from one to the other.
Hex to star, and it's going to animate.
And actually, I can probably do, well,
I won't spend that much time on it.
I was gonna do repeat negative one yo-yo
true, so it's continuously doing it,
but I actually findshapeIndex
does that too.
So I load in findShapeIndex, right?
MorphSVG loaded in,
findShapeIndex loaded in.
And then I say findShapeIndex hex and
star Save, Run, and
this GUI comes up, and
the GUI will start with what it thinks.
It'll try to figure it out for you and
it'll be like what auto
thinks we want is this.
So check out the way that it's morphing
right now, that kind of motion.
That looks pretty good, right?
Well, what happens if we change this?
Watch this,
that is a totally different animation.
That's not even in the same
ballpark of the same animation.
And you can kinda play around with it
like, that's not the same animation.
So the way that you play around with this
can totally change the way that you're
thinking about those shapes, and
the way that they're morphing.
And can be really important if you have
something like a rhino and a hippo.
Maybe one of them looks totally crazy, and
the other one looks like they're
actually changing shape together.
So some of it is about believability.
Some of it is about maybe taste or
something.
So again, this is why I'm so
enthusiastic about GreenSock
is because they don't just make your
life easy by having these plugins.
They always have these extra little
details that are really nice
that make these things
really easy to work with.
I made this CodePen where I live coded
the scene for Smashing Conference.
And this water here was something that I
live coded, so basically this is a bitmap
that's inside of the SVG and I applied
a filter that I'm animating in it.
This is DRAW SVG, that rainbow, right?
That's DRAW SVG, and
then that's view in those coordinates
that we talked about earlier.
And then this arm right
here is not morphSVG.
The arm right here is me playing
with cues, it's just cues.
How I said I love those curves,
those cues.
So it's a queue from here to here,
a queue from here to here,
a queue from here to here and
then I move a couple of different points.
And the way that I do that and
even the way that I do the filter
is to work with attributes.
So I wrote the attribute for
the arm by hand.
>> Sarah Drasner: So
I wrote out the arm by hand here, and
then I wrote out the arm by hand here and
changed it from one to the other.
So remember when I said
GreenSock is beautifully dumb.
It's kind of like, do you have numbers?
I can change numbers, give me numbers.
So in this case,
GreenSock can say, I am just changing
one of these numbers from here to here.
So you can grab attributes out of the DOM.
You can go grab a D and
change some numbers around.
It can also change that ripple effect.
Where did I code that?
I think it was up here, yeah, yes.
This whole thing was something
that I added in and coded and
then I change the attribute over
not in the view part, in here.
So I change the base frequency of
that turbulence and then it causes
all of the filter and the filter
affects that bitmap image beneath it.
Kinda makes this neat, watery,
rippley thing that's kinda
fun to play around with.
So SVG filters can be
super fun to play with.
So if you wanna see that live coding
session, it was like an hour long, so
I'm not gonna do it as
part of the workshop.
We'd be here a long time, but if you want
to see a video of that, it was recorded.
We are going to talk through
this pen a little bit too.
So this was done with morphSVG as well.
I was trying to make a candle and
we talked about elemental,
how to work with elemental motion.
So this is done with
a combination of morphSVG and
changing the filter like we just saw.
So how is this done?
First, I just took some gradients.
I just drew a candle with some gradients.
That's a radial gradient.
This is another kinda gradient and
this is one more gradient.
So it's actually only three paths.
And then I drew a bunch of candles.
And these aren't actually blue and stuff.
I just did that so that you can see
the difference between all of the candles.
Kind of shapes I drew.
I have this one in the middle,
it makes it a little bit more stable
right in the middle of the pen.
And then I have these
little bits that go up.
If you watch the candle for
a little while, there's these little,
I don't know what they are, they are just
little sparks that kind of fly up.
And then there is this background oval
lips that gets bigger and smaller.
So I created a filter and
this filter is not something I thought of.
This is something that I learned
from a guy named Lucas Bever.
He created this filter
that's this GUI filter.
Basically, he makes a contrast filter and
a blur filter work against each other.
And I guess they're natural enemies
out in the wild or something.
And this pen that he made is like
the most popular pen on co-video.
It's not much, right?
It's just our menu opening and
closing, but
everyone's mind was blown by using this
technique of these two filters together.
I think it's got like a million views or
something like that.
So I learned that technique from him
which is you can take two SVG shapes and
make them kind of malleable and
goo into each other which can be used for
all sorts of stuff.
Remember that smokey thing that we were
talking about earlier, with the balls and
stuff, I could totally use one of those
filters to make that smoke effect.
>> Sarah Drasner: I also made a bunch of
those paths that you saw with the kind of
candle, and the first one is f-stable.
I don't know, you can [LAUGH]
call it whatever you want naming.
F1, F2, and so on and so
forth for a bunch of them.
And that's kind of important
because I just used a for
loop to go through them and morphSVG from
one shape to another with that for loop.
But the other thing that the for
loop does is it plots it on
the timeline by using an incrementer.
So every time it finds one,
it goes through.
Opacity is mapped out random because
nature's just a little bit random.
It's just kind of if you don't
try too hard to make it perfect,
it won't actually look perfect
cuz that's not how nature works.
But here's that attribute again,
I went and found the standard
deviation of the filter and I'm
changing the amount of that goo effect.
Because sometimes when you look a candle,
sometimes they're more stable and
they look more full thing, and
then sometimes they look more gooey.
They kinda go in between,
looking like that depending on the air or
environment around them.
This standard deviation is
not an animatable property.
It's not a property that
you're allowed to animate, but
you're using requestAnimationFrame and
just changing numbers.
You could do that with
the Vanilla Java Script too.
But GreenSock also is just like changing
numbers, I can change numbers, totally.